docs: improve self-hosted experimental environment variables documentation (#9160)
renovatebot/renovate: docs/usage/self-hosted-experimental.md

# Self-hosted experimental options

The following options are "experimental" because:

- They are not commonly needed
- They are typically an effort to work around some other service's or platform's problem
- They can be removed at any time
- They are options for Renovate's internal use to validate they work as intended

> Experimental options which are commonly used and for which there is no external solution in sight should be replaced with official options ("Who is doing the replacing here? Renovate bot team or end-user?").

Author: Probably should clarify here who is doing the replacing here, the Renovate team or end-user.

Reviewer: By us or a contributor

Author: So in essence, if the external option turns out to be a good workaround for a external problem, it can become an official option?

Reviewer: yes, it but it should then become an official config option like any other option. Not a simple env variable.

Author: ```suggestion
Experimental options which are commonly used and for which there is no external solution in sight can be converted to a official configuration option by the Renovate bot developers.
```

How about something like this then?

Reviewer: sounds good to me

> Use experimental options at your own risk - they may be removed or behavior changed in any release, not just major, however all attempts will be made not to inconvenience anyone. (Aren't we breaking our "We always follow SemVer promise here?")

Author: ## Relevant SemVer rules:

>5. Version 1.0.0 defines the public API. The way in which the version number is incremented after this release is dependent on this public API and how it changes.

> 7. Minor version Y (x.Y.z | x > 0) MUST be incremented if new, backwards compatible functionality is introduced to the public API. It MUST be incremented if any public API functionality is marked as deprecated. It MAY be incremented if substantial new functionality or improvements are introduced within the private code. It MAY include patch level changes. Patch version MUST be reset to 0 when minor version is incremented.

> 8. Major version X (X.y.z | X > 0) MUST be incremented if any backwards incompatible changes are introduced to the public API. It MAY also include minor and patch level changes. Patch and minor version MUST be reset to 0 when major version is incremented.

## Why I think we're breaking our SemVer promise

I think that having these experimental options is still a "public API", even if we "hide it away" in the code and docs, and warn our users away from using them. So shouldn't we follow SemVer still?

The way I read it the lifetime of a experimental option should be:

1. Introduce experimental option in a `minor` version, as "Minor version Y (x.Y.z | x > 0) MUST be incremented if new, backwards compatible functionality is introduced to the public API."
2. Deprecate experimental option in a `minor` version as "Minor version MUST be incremented if any public API is marked as deprecated".
3. Remove option completely in a `major` version, as we introduce a "backwards incompatible change to the public API".

Reviewer: No, because they are explicit experimental and therefore don't follow semver. But we try to avoid breaking changes on non-major if possible.

Author: Maybe we should be a bit clearer that we're not following SemVer for the experimental options:

```suggestion
Use experimental options at your own risk.
We do not follow Semantic Versioning for any experimental option.
These options may be removed or have their behavior changed in **any** version.
We will try to keep breakage to a minimum, but make no guarantees that a experimental option will keep working.
```

## GITLAB_IGNORE_REPO_URL

If set to any value, Renovate will ignore the Project's `http_url_to_repo` value and instead construct the Git URL manually.

## RENOVATE_CACHE_NPM_MINUTES

> If set to any integer, Renovate will use this integer instead of the default npm cache time (15 minutes) for the npm datasource.

Author: Or do we actually accept any valid type `Number` here? Would `1.5` or `1,55` work properly?

Reviewer: https://github.com/renovatebot/renovate/blob/7d6870a6d06f0797520fb339120c7aaa4a1d3407/lib/datasource/npm/get.ts#L216-L218

must be int

Author: Cheers, thanks for checking that in the code. 😄

# Self-hosted experimental environment variables

> The following enironment variables are "experimental" because:

Author: ```suggestion
The following environment variables are "experimental" because:
```

Whoops, a typo slipped in...
